---
layout: post
title:  "Waterfall moment: Testing my code"
date:   2015-10-05 20:11:33
---

I've been writing code in one form or another for several years now. I started writing code specifically for the web, but so far now I've even developed command line tools and API's. Learning about these things was of course challenging but also fun, but in my opinion something that changed in a whole new level the way I write code (and think about code) is testing. When I worked on developing a website or application I remember using that damn refresh button so many times and submitting that form more than 30 times just to make sure that it's working as expected. Specially on the back-end side of things. I worked a few projects with CodeIgniter and I never wrote tests. It wasn't until I started working with Laravel that I heard the words "write tests" because for me testing something was just writing the code and going to the browser, hit the refresh button and then make sure that what I wrote was working as expected.

I got curious about it when I got a copy of [this](http://laraveltestingdecodedbook.com) book, that's when I found out that you could write code that the computer would run and you would see if your actual code works as expected. Instead of visiting the damn browser every time that you made a change. I learned about unit testing, integration and acceptance testing and all the tools and jargon associated with it. It wasn't easy of course. I think the most difficult thing about testing is learning how to do it well, cause believe me I messed up so many times, spend countless night figuring out all the jargon associated with testing, and mostly because even today we're still figuring this whole thing out.

Couple of months ago I was listening to [this](fullstack radio episode with dave marshall) podcast episode and mentions that the easiest way to learn about testing is testing at the higher level first (if you're reading this and you haven't written a single test before, listen to that particular episode, like right now) meaning that if you're starting out, write acceptance tests first (tests that interact with the browser, the DOM and check responses) and then work your way in to the unit level (tests for your actual classes and business logic). I mention that specifically because I started the other way around and maybe that's why for me this concept of "testing" was harder to grasp.

But certainly once you "get it", you won't want to test anything manually ever again, I certainly don't want to, even if in some cases I HAVE TO. I'm not saying that testing manually is wrong, because it's not. You're still testing your code. But to have a program to do it for you is certainly better.

## Benefits from testing
For me, the most beneficial thing about writing tests is the feeling of confidence when refactoring. Among all the other benefits. I can't emphasize how beneficial it is. Especially when improving your code. Tests have definitely changed the way I write code. I can't imagine how in the world I would refactor an 100-line method, or some repetitive code without tests. How in the world would I make sure that the refactor didn't broke anything? By var_dump(ing) stuff to the browser, and then refreshing, refreshing and refreshing? Hell no. For me those days are gone. Don't be lazy and test your applications, you'll sleep better in the end.

And not to mention when deploying to production. How in the world would you know that that bugfix that you pushed to github didn't broke anything on your production app? By saying a prayer and hoping to Allah and all the saints that it all went well? Hell no, those days are over. Because yeah, it might work on your local environment, but what assurance do you have that it will not blow up once it goes live? Specially if you have clients paying you for whatever it is that you're building for them. Don't be lazy and test your applications, you'll sleep better in the end.
